feat: add CNPGInstanceMetricsAbsent alert and runbook (#207)
paradedb/charts: charts/paradedb/docs/runbooks/CNPGInstanceMetricsAbsent.md

```bash
kubectl exec --namespace <namespace> <pod-name> -- \
  curl -sS --max-time 5 http://localhost:9187/metrics | grep cnpg_collector_up
```

A timeout or empty response confirms the collector is stuck.

### Step 3: Look for a blocked backend

The exporter runs SQL on the local instance. A stuck collector query shows up in `pg_stat_activity`:

```bash
kubectl exec --namespace <namespace> <pod-name> -- psql -c "
SELECT pid, state, wait_event_type, wait_event,
       now() - query_start AS duration, left(query, 120) AS query
FROM pg_stat_activity
WHERE state <> 'idle'
ORDER BY duration DESC NULLS LAST;
"
```

On a standby, check whether replay is actually frozen by looking from the primary:

```bash
kubectl exec --namespace <namespace> services/<cluster_name>-rw -- psql -c "
SELECT application_name, state, replay_lsn, replay_lag FROM pg_stat_replication;
"
```

### Step 4: Inspect logs

```bash
kubectl logs --namespace <namespace> <pod-name> --tail=200
kubectl logs --namespace cnpg-system -l "app.kubernetes.io/name=cloudnative-pg" --tail=200
```

Look for collector errors, statement timeouts, or recovery-conflict / deadlock messages.

## Mitigation

> 1. Terminate the stuck backend found in Step 3:

Author: ```suggestion
1. Terminate the stuck backend found in Step 3, if applicable:
```

   ```bash
   kubectl exec --namespace <namespace> <pod-name> -- psql -c "SELECT pg_terminate_backend(<pid>);"
   ```

> 2. If the hang comes from a monitoring query (for example the `index_info` instrumentation deadlocking on a replica), disable that instrumentation in the cluster's `.spec.monitoring` config until a fixed version is rolled out, then re-enable it after upgrading.

Author: ```suggestion
2. If the hang comes from a monitoring query, disable that instrumentation in the cluster's `.spec.monitoring` config until a fixed version is rolled out, then re-enable it after upgrading.
```

3. As a last resort, recycle the pod. Start with a standby, never the primary, to avoid an unnecessary failover:

   ```bash
   kubectl delete pod --namespace <namespace> <replica-pod-name>
   ```

4. The alert resolves once `cnpg_collector_up` is reported again. Confirm metrics are flowing:

   ```bash
   kubectl exec --namespace <namespace> <pod-name> -- \
     curl -sS --max-time 5 http://localhost:9187/metrics | grep -E "cnpg_collector_up|cnpg_pg_replication_lag"
   ```

## Prevention

> - Keep custom monitoring queries safe to run on standbys, not just primaries — exporter queries run on every instance.

Author: ```suggestion
```

# CNPGInstanceMetricsAbsent

## Description

This alert fires when a running CloudNativePG instance has stopped exporting its `cnpg_*` collector metrics — the exporter is hung rather than restarting. It is built to ride out routine restarts, upgrades, drains and scale-downs, so when it fires the instance is up but its metrics are no longer being collected.

> The chart ships this as an `up == 0` rule with a 10-minute `for`, long enough that a normal restart resolves before it pages. (The managed-platform copy instead gates on `kube_pod_status_ready` from kube-state-metrics; either way the meaning is the same.)

Author: ```suggestion
```

## Impact

The risk is what this hides. The lag, HA and replication alerts all read metrics from this exporter:

- `CNPGClusterPhysicalReplicationLag*` → `cnpg_pg_replication_lag`
- `CNPGClusterHA*` → `cnpg_pg_replication_streaming_replicas`, `cnpg_pg_replication_is_wal_receiver_up`
- logical replication alerts → `cnpg_pg_stat_subscription_*`

They are `expr > threshold` rules, so once the exporter goes silent there are no samples to evaluate and they never fire. While this alert is active, treat the other replication and HA alerts for this instance as blind.

> A hung exporter has previously coincided with a frozen standby: an `index_info` instrumentation query deadlocked on a replica, freezing WAL replay and the collector at the same time. Replication was stuck with no notification because the metric that measures it had stopped reporting.

Author: ```suggestion
A hung exporter can coincide with a frozen standby, which is when replication is stuck with no notification because the metric that measures it had stopped reporting.
```

"
```

### Step 4: Inspect logs

```bash
kubectl logs --namespace <namespace> <pod-name> --tail=200
kubectl logs --namespace cnpg-system -l "app.kubernetes.io/name=cloudnative-pg" --tail=200
```

Look for collector errors, statement timeouts, or recovery-conflict / deadlock messages.

## Resolution

1. Terminate the stuck backend found in Step 3, if applicable:

   ```bash
   kubectl exec --namespace <namespace> <pod-name> -- psql -c "SELECT pg_terminate_backend(<pid>);"
   ```

2. If the hang comes from a monitoring query, disable that instrumentation in the cluster's `.spec.monitoring` config until a fixed version is rolled out, then re-enable it after upgrading.

3. As a last resort, recycle the pod. Start with a standby, never the primary, to avoid an unnecessary failover:

   ```bash
   kubectl delete pod --namespace <namespace> <replica-pod-name>
   ```

4. The alert resolves once `cnpg_collector_up` is reported again. Confirm metrics are flowing:

   ```bash
   kubectl exec --namespace <namespace> <pod-name> -- \
     curl -sS --max-time 5 http://localhost:9187/metrics | grep -E "cnpg_collector_up|cnpg_pg_replication_lag"
   ```

## Prevention

> - Avoid expensive or lock-taking functions in `.spec.monitoring` queries; prefer cheap, read-only `pg_stat_*` reads.

Author: ```suggestion
```
